AI as Normal Technology

An alternative to the vision of AI as a potential superintelligence

By Arvind Narayanan & Sayash Kapoor

April 15, 2025

Artificial Intelligence and Democratic Freedoms

A project studying how advanced AI systems may harm, or help strengthen,
democratic freedoms

We articulate a vision of artificial intelligence (AI) as normal
technology. To view AI as normal is not to understate its impact—even
transformative, general-purpose technologies such as electricity and the
internet are “normal” in our conception. But it is in contrast to both
utopian and dystopian visions of the future of AI which have a common
tendency to treat it akin to a separate species, a highly autonomous,
potentially superintelligent entity.[1]

The statement “AI is normal technology” is three things: a description
of current AI, a prediction about the foreseeable future of AI, and a
prescription about how we should treat it. We view AI as a tool that we
can and should remain in control of, and we argue that this goal does
not require drastic policy interventions or technical breakthroughs. We
do not think that viewing AI as a humanlike intelligence is currently
accurate or useful for understanding its societal impacts, nor is it
likely to be in our vision of the future.[2] 

The normal technology frame is about the relationship between technology
and society. It rejects technological determinism, especially the notion
of AI itself as an agent in determining its future. It is guided by
lessons from past technological revolutions, such as the slow and
uncertain nature of technology adoption and diffusion. It also
emphasizes continuity between the past and the future trajectory of AI
in terms of societal impact and the role of institutions in shaping this
trajectory.

In Part I, we explain why we think that transformative economic and
societal impacts will be slow (on the timescale of decades), making a
critical distinction between AI methods, AI applications, and AI
adoption, arguing that the three happen at different timescales.

In Part II, we discuss a potential division of labor between humans and
AI in a world with advanced AI (but not “superintelligent” AI, which we
view as incoherent as usually conceptualized). In this world, control is
primarily in the hands of people and organizations; indeed, a greater
and greater proportion of what people do in their jobs is AI control.

In Part III, we examine the implications of AI as normal technology for
AI risks. We analyze accidents, arms races, misuse, and misalignment,
and argue that viewing AI as normal technology leads to fundamentally
different conclusions about mitigations compared to viewing AI as being
humanlike.

Of course, we cannot be certain of our predictions, but we aim to
describe what we view as the median outcome. We have not tried to
quantify probabilities, but we have tried to make predictions that can
tell us whether or not AI is behaving like normal technology.

In Part IV, we discuss the implications for AI policy. We advocate for
reducing uncertainty as a first-rate policy goal and resilience as the
overarching approach to catastrophic risks. We argue that drastic
interventions premised on the difficulty of controlling superintelligent
AI will, in fact, make things much worse if AI turns out to be normal
technology— the downsides of which will be likely to mirror those of
previous technologies that are deployed in capitalistic societies, such
as inequality.[3] 

The world we describe in Part II is one in which AI is far more advanced
than it is today. We are not claiming that AI progress—or human
progress—will stop at that point. What comes after it? We do not know.
Consider this analogy: At the dawn of the first Industrial Revolution,
it would have been useful to try to think about what an industrial world
would look like and how to prepare for it, but it would have been futile
to try to predict electricity or computers. Our exercise here is
similar. Since we reject “fast takeoff” scenarios, we do not see it as
necessary or useful to envision a world further ahead than we have
attempted to. If and when the scenario we describe in Part II
materializes, we will be able to better anticipate and prepare for
whatever comes next.

A note to readers. This essay has the unusual goal of stating a
worldview rather than defending a proposition. The literature on AI
superintelligence is copious. We have not tried to give a point-by-point
response to potential counter arguments, as that would make the paper
several times longer. This paper is merely the initial articulation of
our views; we plan to elaborate on them in various follow ups.

Part I: The Speed of Progress

Figure 1. Like other general-purpose technologies, the impact of AI is
materialized not when methods and capabilities improve, but when those
improvements are translated into applications and are diffused through
productive sectors of the economy.[4] There are speed limits at each
stage.

Will the progress of AI be gradual, allowing people and institutions to
adapt as AI capabilities and adoption increase, or will there be jumps
leading to massive disruption, or even a technological singularity? Our
approach to this question is to analyze highly consequential tasks
separately from less consequential tasks and to begin by analyzing the
speed of adoption and diffusion of AI before returning to the speed of
innovation and invention.

We use invention to refer to the development of new AI methods—such as
large language models—that improve AI’s capabilities to carry out
various tasks. Innovation refers to the development of products and
applications using AI that consumers and businesses can use. Adoption
refers to the decision by an individual (or team or firm) to use a
technology, whereas diffusion refers to the broader social process
through which the level of adoption increases. For sufficiently
disruptive technologies, diffusion might require changes to the
structure of firms and organizations, as well as to social norms and
laws.

AI diffusion in safety-critical areas is slow

In the paper Against Predictive Optimization, we compiled a
comprehensive list of about 50 applications of predictive
optimization, namely the use of machine learning (ML) to make
decisions about individuals by predicting their future behavior or
outcomes.[5] Most of these applications, such as criminal risk
prediction, insurance risk prediction, or child maltreatment
prediction, are used to make decisions that have important
consequences for people.

While these applications have proliferated, there is a crucial nuance:
In most cases, decades-old statistical techniques are used—simple,
interpretable models (mostly regression) and relatively small sets of
handcrafted features. More complex machine learning methods, such as
random forests, are rarely used, and modern methods, such as
transformers, are nowhere to be found.

In other words, in this broad set of domains, AI diffusion lags decades
behind innovation. A major reason is safety—when models are more complex
and less intelligible, it is hard to anticipate all possible deployment
conditions in the testing and validation process. A good example is
Epic’s sepsis prediction tool which, despite having seemingly high
accuracy when internally validated, performed far worse in hospitals,
missing two thirds of sepsis cases and overwhelming physicians with
false alerts.[6]

Epic’s sepsis prediction tool failed because of errors that are hard
to catch when you have complex models with unconstrained feature
sets.[7] In particular, one of the features used to train the model
was whether a physician had already prescribed antibiotics —to treat
sepsis. In other words, during testing and validation, the model was
using a feature from the future, relying on a variable that was
causally dependent on the outcome. Of course, this feature would not
be available during deployment. Interpretability and auditing methods
will no doubt improve so that we will get much better at catching
these issues, but we are not there yet.

In the case of generative AI, even failures that seem extremely obvious
in hindsight were not caught during testing. One example is the early
Bing chatbot “Sydney” that went off the rails during extended
conversations; the developers evidently did not anticipate that
conversations could last for more than a handful of turns.[8] 
Similarly, the Gemini image generator was seemingly never tested on
historical figures.[9]

More empirical work would be helpful for understanding the
innovation-diffusion lag in various applications and the reasons for
this lag. But, for now, the evidence that we have analyzed in our
previous work is consistent with the view that there are already
extremely strong safety-related speed limits in highly consequential
tasks. These limits are often enforced through regulation, such as the
FDA’s supervision of medical devices, as well as newer legislation
such as the EU AI Act, which puts strict requirements on high-risk
AI.[10] In fact, there are (credible) concerns that existing
regulation of high-risk AI is so onerous that it may lead to “runaway
bureaucracy”.[11] Thus, we predict that slow diffusion will continue
to be the norm in high-consequence tasks.

At any rate, as and when new areas arise in which AI can be used in
highly consequential ways, we can and must regulate them. A good
example is the Flash Crash of 2010, in which automated high-frequency
trading is thought to have played a part. This led to new curbs on
trading, such as circuit breakers.[12] 


Arvind Narayanan is a professor of computer science at Princeton
University and was the Knight Institute visiting senior research
scientist, 2022-2023.

Sayash Kapoor is a Senior Fellow at Mozilla, a Laurance S. Rockefeller
Fellow in the Princeton University Center for Human Values, and a
computer science Ph.D. candidate at Princeton University's Center for
Information Technology Policy.

[1] Nick Bostrom. 2012. The superintelligent will: Motivation and
instrumental rationality in advanced artificial agents. Minds and
Machines 22, 2 (May 2012), 71–85.
https://doi:10.1007/s11023-012-9281-3; Nick Bostrom. 2017.
Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies (reprinted with
corrections). Oxford University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom; Sam
Altman, Greg Brockman, and Ilya Sutskever. 2023. Governance of
Superintelligence (May 2023).
https://openai.com/blog/governance-of-superintelligence; Shazeda Ahmed
et al. 2023. Building the Epistemic Community of AI Safety. SSRN:
Rochester, NY. doi:10.2139/ssrn.4641526.

[2] This is different from the question of whether it is helpful
for an individual user to conceptualize a specific AI system as a tool
as opposed to a human-like entity such as an intern, a co-worker, or a
tutor.

[3] Daron Acemoglu and Simon Johnson. 2023. Power and Progress: Our
Thousand-Year Struggle over Technology and Prosperity .PublicAffairs,
New York, NY.

[4] Jeffrey Ding. 2024. Technology and the Rise of Great Powers: How
Diffusion Shapes Economic Competition. Princeton University Press,
Princeton.

[5] Angelina Wang et al. 2023. Against predictive optimization: On the
legitimacy of decision-making algorithms that optimize predictive
accuracy. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency (Chicago, IL, USA: ACM, 2023),
626–26. doi:10.1145/3593013.3594030.

[6] Casey Ross. 2022. Epic’s Overhaul of a Flawed Algorithm Shows
Why AI Oversight Is a Life-or-Death Issue. STAT.
https://www.statnews.com/2022/10/24/epic-overhaul-of-a-flawed-algorithm/.

[7] Andrew Wong et al. 2021. External validation of a widely
implemented proprietary sepsis prediction model in hospitalized
patients. JAMA Internal Medicine 181, 8 (August 2021), 1065–70,
https://doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2021.2626. 

[8] Kevin Roose. 2023. A Conversation With Bing’s Chatbot Left Me
Deeply Unsettled. The New York Times (February 2023).
https://www.nytimes.com/2023/02/16/technology/bing-chatbot-microsoft-chatgpt.html.

[9] 9. Dan Milmo and Alex Hern. 2024. ‘We definitely messed up’: why
did Google AI tool make offensive historical images? The Guardian
(March 2024).
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2024/mar/08/we-definitely-messed-up-why-did-google-ai-tool-make-offensive-historical-images
Fortunately, these were not highly consequential applications.

[10] Jamie Bernardi et al. 2024. Societal adaptation to advanced
AI. arXiv: May 2024. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/2405.10295;
Center for Devices and Radiological Health. 2024. Regulatory
evaluation of new artificial intelligence (AI) uses for improving and
automating medical practices. FDA (June 2024).
https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/medical-device-regulatory-science-research-programs-conducted-osel/regulatory-evaluation-new-artificial-intelligence-ai-uses-improving-and-automating-medical-practices;
“Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 13 June 2024 Laying down Harmonised Rules on Artificial
Intelligence and Amending Regulations (EC) No 300/2008, (EU) No
167/2013, (EU) No 168/2013, (EU) 2018/858, (EU) 2018/1139 and (EU)
2019/2144 and Directives 2014/90/EU, (EU) 2016/797 and (EU) 2020/1828
(Artificial Intelligence Act) (Text with EEA Relevance),” June 2024,
http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj/eng.

[11] Javier Espinoza. 2024. Europe’s rushed attempt to set the
rules for AI. Financial Times (July 2024).
https://www.ft.com/content/6cc7847a-2fc5-4df0-b113-a435d6426c81;
Daniel E. Ho and Nicholas Bagley. 2024. Runaway bureaucracy could make
common uses of ai worse, even mail delivery. The Hill (January 2024).
https://thehill.com/opinion/technology/4405286-runaway-bureaucracy-could-make-common-uses-of-ai-worse-even-mail-delivery/.

[12] 12. Avanidhar Subrahmanyam. 2013. Algorithmic trading, the flash
crash, and coordinated circuit breakers. Borsa Istanbul Review 13, 3
(September 2013), 4–9. http://doi:10.1016/j.bir.2013.10.003.
