Dario Amodei

The Adolescence of Technology 

Confronting and Overcoming the Risks of Powerful AI

January 2026

There is a scene in the movie version of Carl Sagan’s book Contact where
the main character, an astronomer who has detected the first radio
signal from an alien civilization, is being considered for the role of
humanity’s representative to meet the aliens. The international panel
interviewing her asks, “If you could ask [the aliens] just one question,
what would it be?” Her reply is: “I’d ask them, ‘How did you do it? How
did you evolve, how did you survive this technological adolescence
without destroying yourself?” When I think about where humanity is now
with AI—about what we’re on the cusp of—my mind keeps going back to that
scene, because the question is so apt for our current situation, and I
wish we had the aliens’ answer to guide us. I believe we are entering a
rite of passage, both turbulent and inevitable, which will test who we
are as a species. Humanity is about to be handed almost unimaginable
power, and it is deeply unclear whether our social, political, and
technological systems possess the maturity to wield it.

In my essay Machines of Loving Grace, I tried to lay out the dream of a
civilization that had made it through to adulthood, where the risks had
been addressed and powerful AI was applied with skill and compassion to
raise the quality of life for everyone. I suggested that AI could
contribute to enormous advances in biology, neuroscience, economic
development, global peace, and work and meaning. I felt it was important
to give people something inspiring to fight for, a task at which both AI
accelerationists and AI safety advocates seemed—oddly—to have failed.
But in this current essay, I want to confront the rite of passage
itself: to map out the risks that we are about to face and try to begin
making a battle plan to defeat them. I believe deeply in our ability to
prevail, in humanity’s spirit and its nobility, but we must face the
situation squarely and without illusions.

As with talking about the benefits, I think it is important to discuss
risks in a careful and well-considered manner. In particular, I think it
is critical to:

- Avoid doomerism. Here, I mean “doomerism” not just in the sense of
  believing doom is inevitable (which is both a false and
  self-fulfilling belief), but more generally, thinking about AI risks
  in a quasi-religious way.¹ Many people have been thinking in an
  analytic and sober way about AI risks for many years, but it’s my
  impression that during the peak of worries about AI risk in 2023–2024,
  some of the least sensible voices rose to the top, often through
  sensationalistic social media accounts. These voices used off-putting
  language reminiscent of religion or science fiction, and called for
  extreme actions without having the evidence that would justify them.
  It was clear even then that a backlash was inevitable, and that the
  issue would become culturally polarized and therefore gridlocked.² As
  of 2025–2026, the pendulum has swung, and AI opportunity, not AI risk,
  is driving many political decisions. This vacillation is unfortunate,
  as the technology itself doesn’t care about what is fashionable, and
  we are considerably closer to real danger in 2026 than we were
  in 2023. The lesson is that we need to discuss and address risks in a
  realistic, pragmatic manner: sober, fact-based, and well equipped to
  survive changing tides.
- Acknowledge uncertainty. There are plenty of ways in which the
  concerns I’m raising in this piece could be moot. Nothing here is
  intended to communicate certainty or even likelihood. Most obviously,
  AI may simply not advance anywhere near as fast as I imagine.³ Or,
  even if it does advance quickly, some or all of the risks discussed
  here may not materialize (which would be great), or there may be other
  risks I haven’t considered. No one can predict the future with
  complete confidence—but we have to do the best we can to plan anyway.
- Intervene as surgically as possible. Addressing the risks of AI will
  require a mix of voluntary actions taken by companies (and private
  third-party actors) and actions taken by governments that bind
  everyone. The voluntary actions—both taking them and encouraging other
  companies to follow suit—are a no-brainer for me. I firmly believe
  that government actions will also be required to some extent, but
  these interventions are different in character because they can
  potentially destroy economic value or coerce unwilling actors who are
  skeptical of these risks (and there is some chance they are right!).
  It’s also common for regulations to backfire or worsen the problem
  they are intended to solve (and this is even more true for rapidly
  changing technologies). It’s thus very important for regulations to be
  judicious: they should seek to avoid collateral damage, be as simple
  as possible, and impose the least burden necessary to get the job
  done.⁴ It is easy to say, “No action is too extreme when the fate of
  humanity is at stake!,” but in practice this attitude simply leads to
  backlash. To be clear, I think there’s a decent chance we eventually
  reach a point where much more significant action is warranted, but
  that will depend on stronger evidence of imminent, concrete danger
  than we have today, as well as enough specificity about the danger to
  formulate rules that have a chance of addressing it. The most
  constructive thing we can do today is advocate for limited rules while
  we learn whether or not there is evidence to support stronger ones.⁵

With all that said, I think the best starting place for talking about
AI’s risks is the same place I started from in talking about its
benefits: by being precise about what level of AI we are talking about.
The level of AI that raises civilizational concerns for me is the
powerful AI that I described in Machines of Loving Grace. I’ll simply
repeat here the definition that I gave in that document:

<blockquote>

By “powerful AI,” I have in mind an AI model—likely similar to today’s
LLMs in form, though it might be based on a different architecture,
might involve several interacting models, and might be trained
differently—with the following properties:

- In terms of pure intelligence, it is smarter than a Nobel Prize winner
  across most relevant fields: biology, programming, math, engineering,
  writing, etc. This means it can prove unsolved mathematical theorems,
  write extremely good novels, write difficult codebases from scratch,
  etc.
- In addition to just being a “smart thing you talk to,” it has all the
  interfaces available to a human working virtually, including text,
  audio, video, mouse and keyboard control, and internet access. It can
  engage in any actions, communications, or remote operations enabled by
  this interface, including taking actions on the internet, taking or
  giving directions to humans, ordering materials, directing
  experiments, watching videos, making videos, and so on. It does all of
  these tasks with, again, a skill exceeding that of the most capable
  humans in the world.
- It does not just passively answer questions; instead, it can be given
  tasks that take hours, days, or weeks to complete, and then goes off
  and does those tasks autonomously, in the way a smart employee would,
  asking for clarification as necessary.
- It does not have a physical embodiment (other than living on a
  computer screen), but it can control existing physical tools, robots,
  or laboratory equipment through a computer; in theory, it could even
  design robots or equipment for itself to use.
- The resources used to train the model can be repurposed to run
  millions of instances of it (this matches projected cluster sizes by
  ~2027), and the model can absorb information and generate actions at
  roughly 10–100x human speed. It may, however, be limited by the
  response time of the physical world or of software it interacts with.
- Each of these million copies can act independently on unrelated tasks,
  or, if needed can all work together in the same way humans would
  collaborate, perhaps with different subpopulations fine-tuned to be
  especially good at particular tasks.

We could summarize this as a “country of geniuses in a datacenter.”

</blockquote>

As I wrote in Machines of Loving Grace, powerful AI could be as little
as 1–2 years away, although it could also be considerably further out.⁶
Exactly when powerful AI will arrive is a complex topic that deserves an
essay of its own, but for now I’ll simply explain very briefly why I
think there’s a strong chance it could be very soon.

My co-founders at Anthropic and I were among the first to document and
track the “scaling laws” of AI systems—the observation that as we add
more compute and training tasks, AI systems get predictably better at
essentially every cognitive skill we are able to measure. Every few
months, public sentiment either becomes convinced that AI is “hitting a
wall” or becomes excited about some new breakthrough that will
“fundamentally change the game,” but the truth is that behind the
volatility and public speculation, there has been a smooth, unyielding
increase in AI’s cognitive capabilities.

We are now at the point where AI models are beginning to make progress
in solving unsolved mathematical problems, and are good enough at coding
that some of the strongest engineers I’ve ever met are now handing over
almost all their coding to AI. Three years ago, AI struggled with
elementary school arithmetic problems and was barely capable of writing
a single line of code. Similar rates of improvement are occurring across
biological science, finance, physics, and a variety of agentic tasks. If
the exponential continues—which is not certain, but now has a
decade-long track record supporting it—then it cannot possibly be more
than a few years before AI is better than humans at essentially
everything.

In fact, that picture probably underestimates the likely rate of
progress. Because AI is now writing much of the code at Anthropic, it is
already substantially accelerating the rate of our progress in building
the next generation of AI systems. This feedback loop is gathering steam
month by month, and may be only 1–2 years away from a point where the
current generation of AI autonomously builds the next. This loop has
already started, and will accelerate rapidly in the coming months and
years. Watching the last 5 years of progress from within Anthropic, and
looking at how even the next few months of models are shaping up, I can
feel the pace of progress, and the clock ticking down.

In this essay, I’ll assume that this intuition is at least somewhat
correct—not that powerful AI is definitely coming in 1–2 years,⁷ but
that there’s a decent chance it does, and a very strong chance it comes
in the next few. As with Machines of Loving Grace, taking this premise
seriously can lead to some surprising and eerie conclusions. While in
Machines of Loving Grace I focused on the positive implications of this
premise, here the things I talk about will be disquieting. They are
conclusions that we may not want to confront, but that does not make
them any less real. I can only say that I am focused day and night on
how to steer us away from these negative outcomes and towards the
positive ones, and in this essay I talk in great detail about how best
to do so.

I think the best way to get a handle on the risks of AI is to ask the
following question: suppose a literal “country of geniuses” were to
materialize somewhere in the world in ~2027. Imagine, say, 50 million
people, all of whom are much more capable than any Nobel Prize winner,
statesman, or technologist. The analogy is not perfect, because these
geniuses could have an extremely wide range of motivations and behavior,
from completely pliant and obedient, to strange and alien in their
motivations. But sticking with the analogy for now, suppose you were the
national security advisor of a major state, responsible for assessing
and responding to the situation. Imagine, further, that because AI
systems can operate hundreds of times faster than humans, this “country”
is operating with a time advantage relative to all other countries: for
every cognitive action we can take, this country can take ten.

What should you be worried about? I would worry about the following
things:

1.  Autonomy risks. What are the intentions and goals of this country?
    Is it hostile, or does it share our values? Could it militarily
    dominate the world through superior weapons, cyber operations,
    influence operations, or manufacturing?
2.  Misuse for destruction. Assume the new country is malleable and
    “follows instructions”—and thus is essentially a country of
    mercenaries. Could existing rogue actors who want to cause
    destruction (such as terrorists) use or manipulate some of the
    people in the new country to make themselves much more effective,
    greatly amplifying the scale of destruction?
3.  Misuse for seizing power. What if the country was in fact built and
    controlled by an existing powerful actor, such as a dictator or
    rogue corporate actor? Could that actor use it to gain decisive or
    dominant power over the world as a whole, upsetting the existing
    balance of power?
4.  Economic disruption. If the new country is not a security threat in
    any of the ways listed in #1–3 above but simply participates
    peacefully in the global economy, could it still create severe risks
    simply by being so technologically advanced and effective that it
    disrupts the global economy, causing mass unemployment or radically
    concentrating wealth?
5.  Indirect effects. The world will change very quickly due to all the
    new technology and productivity that will be created by the new
    country. Could some of these changes be radically destabilizing?

I think it should be clear that this is a dangerous situation—a report
from a competent national security official to a head of state would
probably contain words like “the single most serious national security
threat we’ve faced in a century, possibly ever.” It seems like something
the best minds of civilization should be focused on.

Conversely, I think it would be absurd to shrug and say, “Nothing to
worry about here!” But, faced with rapid AI progress, that seems to be
the view of many US policymakers, some of whom deny the existence of any
AI risks, when they are not distracted entirely by the usual tired old
hot-button issues.⁸ Humanity needs to wake up, and this essay is an
attempt—a possibly futile one, but it’s worth trying—to jolt people
awake.

To be clear, I believe if we act decisively and carefully, the risks can
be overcome—I would even say our odds are good. And there’s a hugely
better world on the other side of it. But we need to understand that
this is a serious civilizational challenge. Below, I go through the five
categories of risk laid out above, along with my thoughts on how to
address them.
